README.md, before:

# **cp1**  
The MotorPH Payroll System - Phase 1

## **Project Description**  

The **MotorPH Payroll System - Phase 1** is a foundational implementation of an employee payroll management system built using **Spring Boot** and **MySQL**. The primary objective of this phase is to **automate the calculation of employee salaries** while ensuring an accurate presentation of employee details.  

This system is designed to:  
✔️ **Display employee information** (employee number, name, and birthday).  
✔️ **Compute the number of hours worked per week** based on attendance records.  
✔️ **Calculate gross weekly salary** based on the total hours worked.  
✔️ **Apply basic deductions** to compute the net weekly salary.  

The **Phase 1 implementation** serves as the core structure of the payroll system, with future phases planned for expanding functionalities such as tax computation, benefits management, and employee records management.  

---

## **REST API Endpoints**

Refer to the following list of links to get an idea what are the REST API endpoints that are developed in the prohject and how HTTP requests are executed in [REST Client extension for Visual Studio Code (VS Code)](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=humao.rest-client).

- [User: User registration, authentication and fetching users](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1/blob/main/USER_HTTP.md)
- [Employee: Displaying employee information, creating new emploee, etc.](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1/blob/main/EMPLOYEE_HTTP.md)




## **Requirements Scope**  

The **MotorPH Payroll System - Phase 1** is built upon the initial requirements identified in the **MotorPH System Milestone 1 Document** ([MS1.md](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1ms1/blob/main/MS1.md)). This document serves as the **foundation** for the system, explicitly defining the core functionalities required for Phase 1.  

However, the current repository ([cp1](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1)) also **incorporates additional considerations**, including implicit requirements and optional enhancements identified by the developer. These additional features are not part of the strict Phase 1 scope but have been **considered for future incremental improvements** as the project progresses. This respository served as the foundation of MS 2.

### **Key Distinctions:**  
✔️ **Explicit Requirements (MS1  repository)**: The non-negotiable functionalities required by MotorPH for Phase 1, such as employee detail presentation, work hours calculation, and payroll processing.  
✔️ **Implicit & Optional Considerations (cp1 repository)**: Additional refinements, optimizations, and potential enhancements that the developer has **factored into the system design** but will be implemented gradually based on feasibility and project scope.  

The primary focus remains on satisfying **Phase 1 requirements** first, while ensuring the system architecture allows for seamless expansion in future phases.  

---

## **Getting Started**  

### **Prerequisites**  
Ensure that the following tools are installed on your system before setting up the project:  

- **Java 17**  
- **Maven 3.4.2**  
- **Docker & Docker Compose** (for database and frontend setup)  
- **MySQL 8** 

---

### **Project Setup**  

#### **1. Clone the Repository**  
```sh
git clone https://github.com/imperionite/cp1.git
cd cp1
```

#### **2. Set Up the Database**  
Run the following command to start the **MySQL database** using Docker:  
```sh
docker run -d --name mysql -p 4306:3306 -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=password -e MYSQL_DATABASE=mydb -e MYSQL_USER=myuser -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=mypassword -v mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql mysql:8.0.40
```
This will initialize a MySQL database instance configured for the application.

---

#### **4. Build and Run the Application**  
Compile and run the **Spring Boot** application:  
```sh
mvn spring-boot:run
```

The application should now be running on `http://localhost:8080`.

---

### **API Endpoints Overview**  
For testing the available API functionalities, refer to the [rest.http](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1/blob/main/rest.http) file in the repository.

---

## Commom CLI Commands Used

```bash
# pull postgres image and run the container named mysql
docker run -d --name mysql -p 4306:3306 -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=password -e MYSQL_DATABASE=mydb -e MYSQL_USER=myuser -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=mypassword -v mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql mysql:8.0.40

# accessing the Running MySQL container
docker ps
docker exec -it mysql bash
mysql -h localhost -u myuser -p mydb
# quit mysql
quit
# quit interactive mode
ctrl+D

# clean slate
docker system prune -a && docker images prune -a && docker volume prune -a

# stop running conainer
docker stop mysql

# restart container
docker restart mysql 

# clean and build Spring Boot app
mvn clean && mvn install

# run Spring boot app
mvn spring-boot:run
```

Commit message:

:lock: (refactor) edit ApplicationRunner and add Attendance

README.md, after:

# **cp1**  
The MotorPH Payroll System - Phase 1

## **Project Description**  

The **MotorPH Payroll System - Phase 1** is a foundational implementation of an employee payroll management system built using **Spring Boot** and **MySQL**. The primary objective of this phase is to **automate the calculation of employee salaries** while ensuring an accurate presentation of employee details.  

This system is designed to:  
✔️ **Display employee information** (employee number, name, and birthday).  
✔️ **Compute the number of hours worked per week** based on attendance records.  
✔️ **Calculate gross weekly salary** based on the total hours worked.  
✔️ **Apply basic deductions** to compute the net weekly salary.  

The **Phase 1 implementation** serves as the core structure of the payroll system, with future phases planned for expanding functionalities such as tax computation, benefits management, and employee records management.  

---

## **REST API Endpoints**

Refer to the following list of links to get an idea what are the REST API endpoints that are developed in the prohject and how HTTP requests are executed in [REST Client extension for Visual Studio Code (VS Code)](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=humao.rest-client).

- [User: User registration, authentication and fetching users](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1/blob/main/USER_HTTP.md)

- [Employee: Displaying employee information, creating new emploee, etc.](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1/blob/main/EMPLOYEE_HTTP.md)

## Initial Data Source and Application Setup

The initial data utilized by this application is sourced from the Google Sheets provided in the Phase 1 requirements instruction, accessible via this [link](https://sites.google.com/mmdc.mcl.edu.ph/motorph/home). Specifically, the [Employee](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1168Un_0b5CPDwDSOH4CWI1m8_-2LpLadX3wAdUNNFOo/edit?usp=sharing) database serves as the foundational dataset. The process of seeding data is accomplished through the use of the `ApplicationRunner`.

### Initial Tables and Data Overview

During the initial execution of the application, several tables and corresponding datasets are established. These tables form the core structure upon which further functionalities will be built.

[![DB Table](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=15q-BlVABOBybvGhubC-ErDoHHw8MnzPF)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/15q-BlVABOBybvGhubC-ErDoHHw8MnzPF/view?usp=sharing)

#### Users Table

[![Users Table](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=1eWGZmh_5VubQ87pKTJM5d66fBTGCnxR3)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1eWGZmh_5VubQ87pKTJM5d66fBTGCnxR3/view?usp=sharing)

#### Employees Table

[![Employees Table](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=1DXsEzSAfoVljpL56ltlXn_PR0IdVsWi8)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1DXsEzSAfoVljpL56ltlXn_PR0IdVsWi8/view?usp=sharing)

**prescribed**

[![Employees Table - prescribed](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=10MqVlvdk2bpgXQQ98vKMz82c36bMePEV)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/10MqVlvdk2bpgXQQ98vKMz82c36bMePEV/view?usp=sharing)

#### Attendance Table

[![Attendance Table](https://drive.google.com/uc?export=view&id=1au5gUECk_yItZT8FVTSU1sj972DgbkB4)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/10MqVlvdk2bpgXQQ98vKMz82c36bMePEV/view?usp=sharing)

## **Requirements Scope**  

The **MotorPH Payroll System - Phase 1** is built upon the initial requirements identified in the **MotorPH System Milestone 1 Document** ([MS1.md](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1ms1/blob/main/MS1.md)). This document serves as the **foundation** for the system, explicitly defining the core functionalities required for Phase 1.  

However, the current repository ([cp1](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1)) also **incorporates additional considerations**, including implicit requirements and optional enhancements identified by the developer. These additional features are not part of the strict Phase 1 scope but have been **considered for future incremental improvements** as the project progresses. This respository served as the foundation of MS 2.

### **Key Distinctions:**  
✔️ **Explicit Requirements (MS1  repository)**: The non-negotiable functionalities required by MotorPH for Phase 1, such as employee detail presentation, work hours calculation, and payroll processing.  
✔️ **Implicit & Optional Considerations (cp1 repository)**: Additional refinements, optimizations, and potential enhancements that the developer has **factored into the system design** but will be implemented gradually based on feasibility and project scope.  

The primary focus remains on satisfying **Phase 1 requirements** first, while ensuring the system architecture allows for seamless expansion in future phases.  

---

## **Getting Started**  

### **Prerequisites**  
Ensure that the following tools are installed on your system before setting up the project:  

- **Java 17**  
- **Maven 3.4.2**  
- **Docker & Docker Compose** (for database and frontend setup)  
- **MySQL 8** 

---

### **Project Setup**  

#### **1. Clone the Repository**  
```sh
git clone https://github.com/imperionite/cp1.git
cd cp1
```

#### **2. Set Up the Database**  
Run the following command to start the **MySQL database** using Docker:  
```sh
docker run -d --name mysql -p 4306:3306 -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=password -e MYSQL_DATABASE=mydb -e MYSQL_USER=myuser -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=mypassword -v mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql mysql:8.0.40
```
This will initialize a MySQL database instance configured for the application.

---

#### **4. Build and Run the Application**  
Compile and run the **Spring Boot** application:  
```sh
mvn spring-boot:run
```

The application should now be running on `http://localhost:8080`.

---

### **API Endpoints Overview**  
For testing the available API functionalities, refer to the [rest.http](https://github.com/imperionite/cp1/blob/main/rest.http) file in the repository.

---

## Commom CLI Commands Used

```bash
# pull postgres image and run the container named mysql
docker run -d --name mysql -p 4306:3306 -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=password -e MYSQL_DATABASE=mydb -e MYSQL_USER=myuser -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=mypassword -v mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql mysql:8.0.40

# accessing the Running MySQL container
docker ps
docker exec -it mysql bash
mysql -h localhost -u myuser -p mydb
SELECT * FROM table_name; # basic select query
# quit mysql
quit
# quit interactive mode
ctrl+D

# clean slate
docker system prune -a && docker images prune -a && docker volume prune -a

# stop running conainer
docker stop mysql

# restart container
docker restart mysql 

# clean and build Spring Boot app
mvn clean && mvn install

# run Spring boot app
mvn spring-boot:run
```
